Niamh25 doc 4628 csde chat cordapp utxo ledger (#973)
corda/corda-docs-portal: content/en/platform/corda/5.0-beta/developing/getting-started/cordapp-standard-development-environment/cordapp-chat.md

* There is no ChatState status in this simple design.

* The multiplicities (numbers on the arrows) indicate that for the create command there should be no input state and one output ChatState.

* The multiplicities for the update command indicates there should be one input ChatState and one output ChatState.

* SC: indicates the signing constraint, that is who needs to sign the transaction. In this case both participants for both the create and update commands.

* The universal constraint applies to all transactions, in this case that there should always be only two  participants in the ChatState.

### Chat State Evolution

The evolution of the ledger when stepping through the walkthrough steps can be shown using the CDL State evolution view:

{{< figure src="chat-state-evolution-view.png" figcaption="CDL state evolution view" alt="CDL state evolution view" >}}

* The Create transaction has no input and starts a new chat with a unique id. The id operates similarly to the Corda 4  `LinearStateId`, which has not been implemented yet in Corda 5.
* Each Update transaction creates the new ChatState as an output and consumes the previous ChatState as an input.

> * To recreate the historic conversation the back chain is traversed from newest (unconsummed) state to oldest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To recreate the historic conversation the backchain is traversed from newest (unconsummed) state to oldest.
```

### Chat Flows

There are six flows in the Chat Application:

> <table>

Reviewer: Should the column widths = 100?
Can the last column contain bullets?

<col style="width:30%">
<col style="width:20%">
<col style="width:20%">
<col style="width:50%">
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Flow</th>
<th>Flow type</th>
<th>Inputs</th>
<th>Action</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><code>CreateNewChatFlow </code></td>
<td><code>RPCStartableFlow </code></td>
<td><code>chatName,otherMember,message</code></td>
<td> Forms a draft transaction using the transaction builder, which creates a new ChatState with the details provided. Signs the draft transaction with the VNodes first Ledger Key. Calls <code>FinalizeChatSubFlow</code> which finalizes the transaction.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>UpdateChatFlow </code></td>
<td><code>RPCStartableFlow </code></td>
<td><code> id, message </code></td>

> <td> Locates the last message in the backchain for the given id.Creates a draft transaction which consumes the last message in the chain and creates a new chatState with the latest message. Signs the draft transaction with the VNodes first Ledger Key.  Calls <code>FinalizeChatSubFlow</code> which finalises the transaction. </td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<td> Locates the last message in the backchain for the given id. Creates a draft transaction which consumes the last message in the chain and creates a new chatState with the latest message. Signs the draft transaction with the VNodes first Ledger Key.  Calls <code>FinalizeChatSubFlow</code> which finalises the transaction. </td>
```

</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>ListChatsFlow </code></a></td>
<td><code>RPCStartableFlow </code></td>
<td><code>none</code></td>
<td>Calls <code>FinalizeChatSubFlow</code> which finalises the transaction.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>GetChatsFlow </code></td>
<td><code>RPCStartableFlow </code></td>
<td><code>id, numberofRecords </code></td>

> <td>Reads the backchain to a depth of `numberOfRecords` for a given id. Returns the list of messages together with who sent them.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<td>Reads the backchain to a depth of <code>numberOfRecords</code> for a given id. Returns the list of messages together with who sent them.</td>
```

</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>FinalizeChatFlow </code></td>
<td><code>SubFlow </code></td>
<td><code>signedTransaction (to finalize),otherMember </code></td>

> <td>The common subflow used by both by both <code>CreateNewChatFlow</code> and <code>UpdateChatFlow</code>. This removes the need to duplicate the responder code. Sets up a session with the <code>FinalizeChatResponderFlow</code> and calls the finality() function. finality()/ receiveFinality() functions, collects required signatures, notarises the transaction and stores the finalized transaction to the respective vaults.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<td>The common subflow used by both by both <code>CreateNewChatFlow</code> and <code>UpdateChatFlow</code>. This removes the need to duplicate the responder code. Sets up a session with the <code>FinalizeChatResponderFlow</code> and calls the <code>finality()</code> function. The <code>finality()</code> or <code>receiveFinality()</code> functions collect required signatures, notarises the transaction, and stores the finalized transaction to the respective vaults.</td>
```

</tr>
<tr>
<td><code>FinalizeChatResponderFlow</code></td>
<td><code>ResponderFlow </code></td>
<td><code>FlowSession  </code></td>

> <td>Runs the <code>receiveFinality()</code> function which performs the responder side of the finality() function.<code>ReceiveFinality()<code> takes a Lambda verifier which runs validations on the transactions.The validator checks for banned words and checks that the message comes from the same party as the messageFrom field.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<td>Runs the <code>receiveFinality()</code> function which performs the responder side of the <code>finality()</code> function. <code>ReceiveFinality()</code> takes a Lambda verifier which runs validations on the transactions. The validator checks for banned words and checks that the message comes from the same party as the <code>messageFrom</code> field.</td>
```

</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Configuring the Application Network (Virtual Nodes)

> The CSDE is configured to create a four party application network required to run the Chat Cordapp, including virtual nodes for Alice, Bob, Charlie and a Notary. If you want to change the network configuration please see section [Configuring the Network Participants](../../getting-started/configure-the-network-participants/network-participants.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CSDE is configured to create a four party application network required to run the Chat Cordapp, including virtual nodes for Alice, Bob, Charlie and a Notary. To change the network configuration, see [Configuring the Network Participants](../../getting-started/configure-the-network-participants/network-participants.md)
```

{{< note >}}

> You will need to keep the notary party otherwise the application will not be able to finalise transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must keep the notary node to enable the CorDapp to finalise transactions.
```

{{< /note >}}

## Deploying the CorDapp

> To deploy and run the CorDapp you will follow the same steps as outlined in the [Running Your First CorDapp](../../getting-started/running-your-first-cordapp/run-first-cordapp.md) section of this getting started guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy and run the CorDapp, follow the same steps as outlined in the [Running Your First CorDapp](../../getting-started/running-your-first-cordapp/run-first-cordapp.md) section of this Getting Started guide.
```

> However, when you come to trigger the flows you will need to trigger the appropriate `ChatFlow` rather than `MyFirstFlow`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, when you come to trigger the flows, you must trigger the appropriate `ChatFlow` rather than `MyFirstFlow`.
```

> Remember to start your docker engine before you attempt to start Corda and make sure Corda is responding to requests before deploying the CorDapp.

Reviewer: Should maybe be a note?

## Using Swagger

> For this walkthrough we will assume you are using the `Swagger GUI` to trigger flows. For each flow we will be using the Flow Management section of the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this walkthrough, we assume you are using the `Swagger GUI` to trigger flows. For each flow, we use the Flow Management section of the API.
```

> You will need to know the `holdingidentityshorthash` for both Alice and Bob’s nodes, you can get this by running the `listVNodes` Gradle helper in the csde-queries section of the gradle helper tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You must know the `holdingidentityshorthash` for both Alice and Bob’s nodes. You can retrieve this by running the `listVNodes` Gradle helper in the `csde-queries` section of the gradle helper tasks.
```
Can we add a link to info about this helper?

{{< figure src="listvnodes.png" figcaption="listVnodes Gradler helper" alt="listVnodes Gradler helper" >}}

> Which will return something similar to this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The task returns something similar to this:
```

{{< figure src="listvnodes-result.png" figcaption="listVnodes result" alt="listVnodes result" >}}

> The Vnode `holdingidentityshorthashes` (short hashes) are the 12 digit hex numbers. In the above Alice’s short hash is "17F49B05B2B5" and Bob’s is “8C73E39AF476”. Whenever the API requires the short hash substitute the appropriate number depending on which Vnode you want to run the flow on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Vnode `holdingidentityshorthashes` (short hashes) are the 12 digit hex numbers. In the above example, Alice’s short hash is "17F49B05B2B5" and Bob’s is “8C73E39AF476”. Whenever the API requires the short hash, substitute the appropriate number depending on which vnode you want to run the flow on.
```

> For running the flows we will use the POST: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/ end point. This requires a request body to be provided which includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For running the flows we use the `POST: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/` end point. This requires a request body to be provided which includes:
```

> * clientRequestId to uniquely identify the request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `clientRequestId` to uniquely identify the request
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * flowClassName which provides the fully qualified name of the flow to be triggered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `flowClassName` which provides the fully qualified name of the flow to be triggered
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * requestData which provides the input arguments for the flow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `requestData` which provides the input arguments for the flow
```

For example:

```java
   {
    "clientRequestId": "create-1",
    "flowClassName": "com.r3.developers.csdetemplate.utxoexample.workflows.CreateNewChatFlow",
    "requestData": {
        "chatName":"Chat with Bob",
        "otherMember":"CN=Bob, OU=Test Dept, O=R3, L=London, C=GB",
        "message": "Hello Bob"
        }
}
 ```

> Swagger will also give you the curl command which can be used to run the request directly from the command line, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swagger also gives the curl command which you can use to run the request directly from the command line, for example:
```

  ```java
curl -X 'POST' \
  'https://localhost:8888/api/v1/flow/17F49B05B2B5' \
  -H 'accept: application/json' \
  -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{
    "clientRequestId": "create-1",
    "flowClassName": "com.r3.developers.csdetemplate.utxoexample.workflows.CreateNewChatFlow",
    "requestData": {
        "chatName":"Chat with Bob",
        "otherMember":"CN=Bob, OU=Test Dept, O=R3, L=London, C=GB",
        "message": "Hello Bob"
        }
}'
```

> If the flow has been successfully started Swagger will show a “START REQEUSTED” response, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the flow has been successfully started, Swagger shows a “START REQEUSTED” response, for example:
```

  ```java
{
  "holdingIdentityShortHash": "17F49B05B2B5",
  "clientRequestId": "create-1",
  "flowId": null,
  "flowStatus": "START_REQUESTED",
  "flowResult": null,
  "flowError": null,
  "timestamp": "2023-01-18T09:45:25.911889Z"
}
```

> If something has gone wrong you will get an error response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If something has gone wrong, Swagger shows an error response.
```

> For polling for the result of a flow we will use the GET: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/{clientrequestid} endpoint. This requires the short hash of the node the flow was run against and the clientRequestId specified when the flow was run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For polling for the result of a flow, use the `GET: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/{clientrequestid}` endpoint. This requires the short hash of the node the flow was run against and the `clientRequestId` specified when the flow was run.
```

The curl version is:
curl -X 'GET' \
  'https://localhost:8888/api/v1/flow/17F49B05B2B5/create-1' \
  -H 'accept: application/json'
If the flow has run successfully this will return a “COMPLETED” Status together with the flowResult.

  ```java
{
  "holdingIdentityShortHash": "17F49B05B2B5",
  "clientRequestId": "create-1",
  "flowId": "fa0dec91-4a94-476c-8b1b-82dc95a55134",
  "flowStatus": "COMPLETED",
  "flowResult": "SHA-256D:FACC6487F3478D69A543CE7061611C8792C0FBC1FCC4903742ABF82E0D8F1D14",
  "flowError": null,
  "timestamp": "2023-01-18T10:36:16.889777Z"
}
```

{{< note >}}

> It can take up to a minute for Corda to Process the flow, this is likely a function of using the local Combined Worker version of Corda which runs all the cluster processes in one JVM with limited resources. If this were to be run in a more typical cloud deployment you would expect it to be much faster. Whilst corda is still processing the request you would get a “RUNNING” status returned. Keep polling the end point every 10 seconds or so until you get a result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can take up to a minute for Corda to process the flow. This is likely a function of using the local Combined Worker version of Corda which runs all the cluster processes in one JVM with limited resources. If this were to be run in a more typical cloud deployment, you would expect it to be much faster. Whilst corda is still processing the request, Swagger returns a “RUNNING” status. Keep polling the end point every 10 seconds or so until you get a result.
```

{{< /note >}}

## Typical Set of Flows

> A typical set of flows for a conversation between Alice and Bob would be as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A typical set of flows for a conversation between Alice and Bob is as follows:
```

> 1. Alice Creates an new Chat using the CreateNewChatFlow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Alice Creates a new Chat using the `CreateNewChatFlow`
```

> POST: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}

Reviewer: Is this the command for the previous step?
Looks like it might need to be indented?

> 

Reviewer: Need to introduce this code block:
(Might also need to be indented?)

  ```java
{
    "clientRequestId": "create-1",
    "flowClassName": "com.r3.developers.csdetemplate.utxoexample.workflows.CreateNewChatFlow",
    "requestData": {
        "chatName":"Chat with Bob",
        "otherMember":"CN=Bob, OU=Test Dept, O=R3, L=London, C=GB",
        "message": "Hello Bob"
        }
}
```

> Followed by polling for status with: GET: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/{clientrequestid}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Followed by polling for status with `GET: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/{clientrequestid}`
```

> It should return “COMPLETED” after a short delay.

Reviewer: indent?

> 2. Bob lists his Chats that he is a participant in using the ListChatFlow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Bob lists his Chats that he is a participant in using the `ListChatFlow`.
```

POST: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}  

  ```java
{
    "clientRequestId": "list-1",
    "flowClassName": "com.r3.developers.csdetemplate.utxoexample.workflows.ListChatsFlow",
    "requestData": {}
}
```

> Followed by polling for status with: GET: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/{clientrequestid}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Followed by polling for status with: `GET: /flow/{holdingidentityshorthash}/{clientrequestid}`
```

> It should return “COMPLETED” after a short delay the output will show the flowResult with the single chat that Bob is a participant in. From this he can get the id number 674276c9-f311-43a6-90b8-73439bc7e28b which he will need to update the chat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should return “COMPLETED” after a short delay. The output shows the flowResult with the single chat that Bob is a participant in. From this he can get the id number `674276c9-f311-43a6-90b8-73439bc7e28b` which he needs to update the chat.
```

---
date: '2023-01-23'
title: "Chat CorDapp"
menu:
  corda-5-beta:
    parent: corda-5-beta-start
    identifier: corda-5-beta-chatcordapp
    weight: 3000
section_menu: corda-5-beta
---

## Introduction

> The CSDE template includes examples of CorDapp code for a simple UTXO (Unspent Transaction Output) Chat application. The Chat CorDapp allows pairs of participants on a Corda Application network to do the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CSDE template includes examples of CorDapp code for a simple UTXO (Unspent Transaction Output) chat application. The chat CorDapp allows pairs of participants on a Corda application network to do the following:
```

* Create and name a unique bilateral chat between the two virtual nodes.
* Update chats with new messages from either virtual node.
* Obtain a list of chats that the virtual node is a participant in.
* Retrieve a specified number of previous messages from a chat.

> There is both a Kotlin and Java implementation of the Chat CorDapp in the respective `csde-cordapp-template-kotlin` and `csde-cordapp-template-java-repos`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is both a Kotlin and Java implementation of the Chat CorDapp in the respective `csde-cordapp-template-kotlin` and `csde-cordapp-template-java` repos.
```
